---
title: "The in vivo stress state of human cardiovascular tissue"
collection: talks
type: "Conference talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-07-talk-WCB-Dublin1
venue: "8th World Congress of Biomechanics"
date: 2018-07-09
location: "Dublin, Ireland"
---

<Upon building complex patient-specific biomechanical models of the cardiovascular system, the presence of a constant physiological pressure load remains a complicating factor given that the imaged tissue is in a pre-stressed and -strained state. Neglect of this prestressed state into solid tissue mechanics models leads to erroneous metrics (e.g. wall deformation, peak stress, wall shear stress) which in their turn are used for device design choices, risk assessment (e.g. procedure, rupture) and surgery planning. It is thus of utmost importance to incorporate this deformed and loaded tissue state into the computational models, which implies solving an inverse problem (calculating the undeformed geometry given the load and the deformed geometry).>
<> Methodologies to solve this inverse problem can be categorized into iterative and direct methodologies, both having their inherent advantages and disadvantages. Whilst iterative approaches offer the advantage of straightforward implementation in combination with any existing finite element (FE) solver, they suffer from high computational costs and convergence issues, especially for fiber-embedded anisotropic, hyperelastic and quasi-incompressible materials (as all cardiovascular tissues). Direct methodologies are typically based upon the inverse elastostatics (IE) approach and offer a computationally efficient single shot methodology to compute the in vivo stress state. However, cumbersome and problem-specific derivations of the formulations and non-trivial access to the FE code, especially for commercial products, refrain a broad implementation of these methodologies. For that reason, we developed a modified, modular IE approach and implemented this methodology in the commercial FEA solver Abaqus with minor user subroutine interventions.
<> The accuracy of this modified approach was assessed in two test cases, an arterial tube model with two families of collagen fibers embedded into the lumen wall and a porcine biventricular myocardium model with a complex architectural distribution of myocytes anchored in a connective collagen and elastic fiber embedded tissue network. The roundtrip (inverse deflation simulation followed by a forward inflation simulation) stress and displacement accuracy for the arterial model amounted to 99.43% and 98.74%, respectively, and to 99.07% and 99.53% for the cardiac model. Subsequently, we applied the methodology on models containing multiple interacting incompressible, anisotropic (fiber-embedded) and hyperelastic material behaviors. In the left figure panel, the computed zero pressure geometry (transparent grey) and in vivo stress state (sliced visualization) of a complex patient-specific AAA model is shown. The mid-right panel depicts the computed zero pressure state (transparent grey) and in vivo strained state of a full patient-based living human heart model in diastole (with the computed stress state of the ventricles depicted separately in a short and long axis slice).
